Move all messaging patterns to device specification (#194)
harp-tech/protocol: Device.md

Except for [Optional or Deprecated registers](#optional-or-deprecated-registers), whose behavior is clarified below, all registers and functionality specified in this document MUST be implemented by a Device complying with this specification.

## Operation Mode

The following Device operation modes MUST be implemented:

- `Standby:` All `Event` messages are disabled and MUST NOT be sent to the Controller.
- `Active:` All `Event` messages are enabled and SHOULD be sent to the Controller following the Device specification.

The Device SHOULD continuously check if communication with the Controller is active and healthy. This status check will be largely dependent on the transport layer implementing the Harp communication protocol between Controller and Device. Each implementation SHOULD clearly distinguish between `Connected` and `NotConnected` states, and it is up to the developer to decide how to implement this status check. When the Device transitions to the `NotConnected` state, it MUST immediately enter `Standby` and stop transmission of further `Event` messages.

> As an application example, a Device using RS-232 as the physical layer MAY poll for an active USB connection by checking whether the state of the DTR pin is `HIGH`. Once the DTR pin is brought `LOW`, the Device SHOULD assume the Controller closed the connection and enter `Standby`. The Controller MUST update the state of the DTR line when opening or closing a new serial connection to the Device.

Author: > a Device using RS-232 as the physical layer MAY poll for an active USB connection by checking whether the state of the DTR pin is `HIGH`

It also somehow feels very strange that we talk about "a Device using the DTR pin of the RS-232 physical interface" to check the state of a **USB** connection, so many mixed concepts here. Everything works fine at the implementation level, in the end it is just a serial port that can be implemented in arbitrary ways. It just feels like there should be a conceptually cleaner way to explain this.

@bruno-f-cruz @jfrazao Maybe the easiest is to just keep everything straightforward and say:

> As an application example, a Device communicating over a serial port MAY poll for an active connection by checking whether the state of the DTR pin is HIGH.

This way we keep agnostic to the exact serial interface details while using familiar terminology that everyone will hopefully understand all the way down to the implementation level.

> As an application example, a Device using RS-232 as the transport layer MAY poll for an active USB connection by checking whether the state of the DTR pin is `HIGH`. Once the DTR pin is brought `LOW` the Device SHOULD assume that the Controller closed the connection and enter `Standby`. The Controller MUST update the state of the DTR line when opening or closing a new RS-232 connection to the Device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an application example, a Device using RS-232 as the physical interface MAY poll for an active USB connection by checking whether the state of the DTR pin is `HIGH`. Once the DTR pin is brought `LOW`, the Device SHOULD assume that the Controller closed the connection and enter `Standby`. The Controller MUST update the state of the DTR line when opening or closing a new serial connection to the Device.
```

Not sure if this is more clear, but not sure if RS232 should be considered a transport layer (since it is an hardware standard, not really protocol).

Author: Looking both at the wikipedia article and the broader internet, my feeling is that RS-232 is kind of like Harp. It is a "standard" that includes both a communication protocol and specs for hardware connectors and cables, etc.

It is clearly not just hardware though, since both USB (different wires) and Bluetooth (wireless) implement virtual "serial ports", which do work even if I have not seen a physical serial port connector in a very long time.

The notion of "transport layer" is also purely conceptual, although it is very tied to the internet protocol, so perhaps using something else is better, but not sure I prefer the term "physical interface" for the reasons stated above.

Maybe we can use the term UART instead, in the end I just want to capture whatever it is a COM port on Windows is doing as an example, which is already a mess because of device driver emulation (see https://stackoverflow.com/a/27942559).

Reviewer: Here's another way to look at it:
* virtual serial ports emulate the RS232 physical layer in software
* the feature described in the application note is a physical layer feature (i.e.: DTR Pin). Sure, in modern systems, it so happens that the layer is emulated in software, but it is still a specification of the physical interface (RS232).

All `Event` messages sent by the Device SHOULD be timestamped with the Harp clock time as early as possible following the event trigger.

### Error Handling

The [`Error`](BinaryProtocol-8bit.md#error-flag-1-bit) flag in the [`MessageType`](BinaryProtocol-8bit.md#messagetype-1-byte) field MAY be set by the Device on messages signalling an error while processing a request from the Controller. The Device SHALL NOT send any error replies to the Controller when configured to mute all replies (see [Request-Reply](#request-reply)). Since information included in error messages is limited, we RECOMMEND restricting error replies to the following cases:

  1. The message is a request to read (or write) a register that does not exist on the Device.
  2. The message [`PayloadType`](BinaryProtocol-8bit.md#payloadtype-1-byte) does not match the register specification.
  3. The message is a write request to a read-only register.
  4. The message is a write request, and the length of the payload does not match the register specification.
  5. The message is a write request, and the payload is outside the allowable range of register values.

> Requests which require prior configuration of multiple registers (e.g. starting a pulse train, moving a motor), or requests which are invalid due to particular combinations of other register values, SHOULD NOT be handled by sending an error reply to a write request from the Controller.

Author: Which ones? The rules here have been confirmed to be enforced/validated by the ATXmega core for all registers, but perhaps the pico is different?

In that case would be good to meet to understand what exactly is being validated, and why, and whether we should align implementations.

> Requests which require prior configuration of multiple registers (e.g. starting a pulse train, moving a motor), or requests which are invalid due to particular combinations of other register values, SHOULD NOT be handled by sending an error reply to a write request from the Controller.

Reviewer: The stepper driver (https://github.com/harp-tech/device.stepperdriver) returns an error message when someone attempts to write to a move register and the device cannot execute it (e.g. if the interlock is set)
